---
title: Tutorial #2 - Chat Monitor
description: 
published: true
date: 2024-09-27T06:05:13.828Z
tags: 
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2024-09-24T08:27:42.804Z
---

# Tutorial #2 - Chat Monitor

This tutorial explains how to build an application that listens for chat messages and parses them when they arrive. When it receives a chat message with a special message inside, it sends its own transaction out onto the network to celebrate. This covers sending and receiving transactions.

## Creating Module Directory

Navigate into your ```/mods``` directory and create a folder with the name ```tutorial02```. Within that directory create the file ```tutorial02.js```. Copy the text below into this this file.

```
var ModTemplate = require('../../lib/templates/modtemplate');
const MainUI = require('./lib/main');

class Tutorial02 extends ModTemplate {

  constructor(app) {

    super(app);

    this.name            = "Tutorial02";
    this.slug            = "tutorial02";
    this.description     = "Transactions and UI Components";

    this.ui              = new MainUI(this.app, this);

    return this;

  }

}

module.exports = Tutorial01;
```

## Listening for Inbound Transactions

We want our application to listen for messages that have been sent to the Chat module, so we add the following function which will ensure that whenever Saito receives a Chat message, our module is notified and has the option of processing it!

```
  shouldAffixCallbackToModule(modname) {
    if (modname == this.name) { return 1; }
    if (modname == 'Chat') { return 1; }
    if (modname == 'Relay') { return 1; }
    return 0;
  }
  ```

There are two functions that we need to provide to get our module listening to inbound messages. The first function ```onConfirmation()``` runs whenever transactions are received on-chain, while the second function ```handlPeerTransaction()``` runs if a transaction arrives directly off-chain from one of our peers. In both cases, we are sent a transaction object to process, and forward it to a third function that will analyse the transaction.

```
  async onConfirmation(blk, tx, conf) {
    let txmsg = tx.returnMessage();
    if (conf == 0 && txmsg.module === "Chat") {      
        modself.processChatTransaction(txmsg);
      }
    }
  }

  async handlePeerTransaction(app, tx, peer, mycallback = null) {  
    let txmsg = tx.returnMessage();
      
    if (txmsg.module == "Chat") {
      this.processChatTransaction(txmsg);
    }

    if (txmsg.request == "chat relay") {
      let inner_tx = new Transaction(undefined, txmsg.data);
      await inner_tx.decryptMessage(app);
      let inner_txmsg = inner_tx.returnMessage();
      this.processChatTransaction(inner_txmsg);
    } 
    
  }
 ```
 
There are three ways that Chat messages generally arrive: on-chain, off-chain or via the Relay module. The code captures all three methods and redirects the transaction to a new function inside its own module called ```processChatTrasaction(txmsg)```. Let's move on to code this function.

```
  async processChatTransaction(txmsg) {
    if (this.app.BROWSER) {
      if (txmsg.message) {
        if (txmsg.message.indexOf("huzzah") > -1) {
          alert("Huzzah!");
        }
      }
    }
  }
 ```

Compile this application and load it up in your browser. This time, if you send a chat message containing the word "huzzah" you'll get the notification, but your module will also create a new transaction and broadcast it to the network. If you have installed the explorer module, you can look inside this transaction.




## Reference Materials

If you would like to test this application without compiling it yourself, you can find a pre-packaged version available for installation into your browser here. Download the file and drag-and-drop it into your browser. The See here for instructions on compiling your own application into this portable format.

You can find the complete source code associated with this tutorial in the default ```/mods``` directory.  Alternately, you can access all of the files in this tutorial by downloading this [ZIP file](/tutorial02.zip). Or just download this application as a [precompiled Saito module](/) and install it into your wallet.



In our [next tutorial](/tech/tutorial/03) we’ll create an application that can receive transactions in addition to sending them. Before we get to that, there’s something important you may have realized: the Saito AppStore is an application like any other application. Although our tutorial series starts with small applications, there’s no limit to the complexity of the applications that you want to build.

